DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS (VA)
Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses (RACGWVI)
2024 Recommendations
The Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses (RACGWVI)
presents the following recommendations for consideration to the Secretary of Veterans
Affairs. These recommendations are based on the work of several RACGWVI parent
meetings and working group efforts, current Gulf War Illness (GWI) research priorities
as well as the commitment passed into law with the Promise to Address Comprehensive
Toxics Act of 2022 (PACT Act), and feedback from Gulf War Veterans (GWV) during
subcommittee Veteran Engagement Sessions (VES).
Recommendation 1: Establish regional research units (GWI-RRU) to facilitate GWI
research designed to accomplish the following:
1A. Increasing participation of Veterans in GWI-related clinical trials,
observational studies, and basic research. Concur-in-Principle.
1B. Building capacity for GWI clinical trials and other research by enabling
access of researchers and clinicians to repository and research resources.
Concur-in-Principle.
1C. Leveraging past, current and future VA research investments by enabling
protocol approval and subject recruitment by non-VA investigators. Concur-inPrinciple.
1D. Increasing diversity of participants in clinical trials involving Veterans.
Concur.
1E. Assisting with harmonization of (clinical/research) Case Definition and
International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-10 code for GWI clinical trial
capacity. Concur.
VA Response: Concur-in-Principle.
The principles of allowing non-VA investigators access to VA research resources such
as biorepositories, recruitment of Veterans at VA medical facilities, and other
programmatic resources is dependent on VA directives and regulatory oversight.
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Office of Research & Development (ORD) is the
VA office for funding investigator-initiated projects and management of those projects.
VA Science and Health Initiative to Combat Infectious and Emerging Life-Threatening
Diseases (VA-SHIELD) is one of ORDs biorepositories that can serve as a tissue
repository for consented 1990-91 Gulf War Veterans. VA-SHIELD is working on
regulatory means to open this resource to non-VA funded investigators; however, at this
time it is a VA resource accessible to VA funded investigators and their non-VA funded

Page 1 of 5

collaborators. Similarly, VHA ORD is home of the Million Veteran Program, which at this
time functions like VA-SHIELD. However, the VA Biorepository Brain Bank has a
process to allow non-VA funded investigators access to tissue and data. Recruitment of
Veterans for clinical trials, observational studies, and basic research using VA Medical
Centers is at the discretion of the local Medical Director per VA Directive 1200.05.
We concur that it is important to ensure participant diversity in clinical research and
biobanking and will continue to encourage inclusion of women and minorities.
Additionally, the Gulf War Research Program has invested in, and continues to support,
research aligned with identifying a case definition and common data elements for Gulf
War illness clinical trials.
Recommendation 2: Establish mechanisms that facilitate interagency GWI
research to increase and leverage aligned research efforts within the VA,
Department of Defense (DoD), and other institutions that will:
2A. Actively encourage intra-VA and interagency collaborations to expand
research into GWI and toxic exposures promoted under the PACT Act.
2B. Increase matching funds for jointly funded programs between the VA and
other entities (e.g., DoD Congressionally Directed Medical Research
Programs (CDMRP) conducting GWI and toxic exposure research.
VA Response: Concur-in-Principle.
The VA Gulf War Research Program has an extensive history of collaborating with the
DoD CDMRP during their yearly vision and goal setting meetings on toxic exposures
and previously GWI. This ensures research projects are not funded in a duplicative
manner and that the programs are aligned to strategic goals.
VHA ORD research dollars have appropriation restrictions. VA research is an intramural
program and can only fund clinician and non-clinician investigators with a 5/8th VA
appointment. DoD CDMRP also has processes and congressional mandates on their
research dollars. Besides the appropriations restrictions, co-funding of projects, or even
matching funds is administratively a barrier due to review cycles, oversight, and
management of projects by each corresponding agency.
VHA ORD does work with DoD closely to ensure a collaborative environment exists. For
example, the DoD CDMRP Toxic Exposure Research Program manager and VA Gulf
War Research Program Director have co-hosted state-of-the-science meetings to bring
together investigators from both agencies to harmonize efforts and collaborations.
Secondly, the VA Gulf War Program Director attends the DoD vision setting and funding
meetings. Finally, VHA ORD Gulf War funded projects predominately have DoD and
National Institutes of Health (NIH) funded investigators as collaborators. These
collaborations ensure camaraderie within the Gulf War research community. The VA
Gulf War Program Director will continue to work with the DoD CDMRP Toxic Exposure
Research Program manager to ensure Gulf War investigators have the tools they need

Page 2 of 5

to advance our understanding of the health consequences from serving in the Persian
Gulf War.
Recommendation 3: Continue efforts and increase funding for 1990-91 Gulf War
Research Innovation Centers (GWRIC).
VA Response: Concur.
VHA ORD will conduct a gap analysis of the Gulf War Research Program under the
purview and blueprint of the PACT Act. We will consider novel means for standing up
and supporting GWRICs through developing and releasing of requests for applications
(RFA) to the field. We will encourage DoD and NIH transdisciplinary investigators as
collaborators with the intent of thinking outside the box for building biorepositories and
encouraging consenting mechanisms for Veterans to be recontacted for research and
allowing any unused specimen to be banked in VA-SHIELD and used for future
research. We anticipate these efforts could support some of the recommendations
above that are labeled ‘Concur-in-Principle’ and within our scope and abilities.

Page 3 of 5


